>>As far back as I can remember
into earliest childhood,
I've always been
absolutely fascinated
with the idea of death.
Now you may think
that's kind of morbid.
But you know when
a child at night
says the phrase "if I
should die before I wake?"
There's something about it
that's absolutely weird.
What would it be like to go
to sleep and never wake up?
Now most reasonable people
just dismiss the thought.
They say, you
can't imagine that.
They shrug their shoulders and
say, well, that'll be that.
But I suppose I'm one of
those ornery people who
aren't content with
and answer like that.
Not that I'm trying to find
something else beyond that,
but that I'm just absolutely
fascinated with what it would
be like to go to sleep
and never wake up.
I mean-- Lots of
people think it will
be like going into the dark
forever or being buried alive.
But obviously, it wouldn't
be like that at all.
Because we know darkness by
contrast, and only by contrast,
with light.
I have a friend,
a girl, who's very
intelligent and articulate,
and she was born blind.
And she hasn't the faintest
idea what darkness is.
The word means as little
to her as the word light.
So if you went to
sleep, you're not
aware of darkness
when you're asleep.
And so if you went into
sleep, into unconsciousness
for always and
always and always,
it wouldn't be at all
like going into the dark.
It wouldn't be at all
like being buried alive.
It would be as if,
as a matter of fact,
you had never existed
at all-- not only you,
but everything else as well.
You would be in that state
as if you had never been.
And there, of course,
there would be no problems.
There would be no one to
regret the loss of anything.
You couldn't even
call it a tragedy,
because there would be no one
to experience it as a tragedy.
It would be simple, nothing
at all forever and for never.
Because not only would
you have no future,
you would also have no
past and no present.
Now, you would think that
that was the point where
we would say, well, let's
talk about something else.
But I'm not content with that.
I demure.
Because this makes me
think of two other things.
This state of nothingness
makes me think, first
of all-- the only
thing I get anywhere
in my experience that's
close to nothingness
is the way my head
looks to my eyes.
Because I seem to feel that
there is a world out there,
as it were, confronting my eyes.
And then behind my eyes
there isn't a black spot.
There isn't even a hazy spot.
There's nothing at all.
I'm not aware of my head,
as it were, as a black hole
in the middle of all this
luminous visual experience.
It doesn't even have
very clear edges,
because the field of
vision is an oval.
And if I run my fingers
along my field of vision,
it's like this.
And this is the point
where my fingers just
disappear from
sight, vague-edged.
But then behind this oval of
vision there is nothing at all,
just from the sense of sight.
Of course, if I use
my fingers and touch,
I can feel something
behind my eyes.
But if I use the
sense of sight alone,
there's just nothing
there at all.
Now, nevertheless, out
of that blankness I see.
Well, that's the first
thing it makes me think of.
Now the next thing it
makes me think of is this.
If when I'm dead I am
as if I never had been,
then that's the way I
was before I was born.
Because just as if I try
to go back behind my eyes
and find what is there
I come to a blank,
if I try to remember
back and back
and back and back, I've got
my earliest memories and then
behind them nothing,
total blank.
But just as I know there's
something behind my eyes
by using my fingers
on my head, so I
know through other
sources of information
that before I was born there
was something going on.
There were my
father and my mother
and their fathers and mothers
and the whole material
environment of the
Earth and its life
out of which they came and
behind that the solar system
and behind that the galaxy and
behind that all the galaxies
and behind that
another blank, space.
So, I reason that
if I go back when
I'm dead to the state where
I was before I was born,
couldn't I happen again?
What has happened once can
very well happen again.
If it happened once,
it's extraordinary,
and it's not really very
much more extraordinary
if it happened all over again.
So in other words, I
do know for certain,
because I've seen
people die and I've
seen people born
after them, that
at any rate after I die not
only somebody but myriads
of other beings will be born.
That I know.
We all know that.
There's no doubt about it.
But what worries us is
that when we're dead
there could be nothing
at all forever,
as if that was something
to worry about.
Before you were born, there
was this same nothing at all
forever, and yet you happened.
And if you happen once,
you can happen again.
Now what does that mean?
Well, we'll get at it first
in its very simplest way.
And to explain myself, I
must invent a new verb.
This is the verb to I.
And in the first place,
we'll spell that
with the letter I,
but instead of having it as a
pronoun we'll call it a verb.
The universe I-s.
It has I-ed in me
and it I-s in you.
Now let's re-spell
the word E-Y-E.
When I talk about
to eye something,
it means to look at something,
to be aware of something.
So we'll change the
spelling, and we'll
say the universe eyes.
It becomes aware of
itself in each one of us.
And it keeps on eyeing.
And every time it eyes, every
one of us in whom it eyes
feels that he is the
center of the whole thing
and that I know that
you feel that you are I
in just the same way
that I feel that I am I.
And we all have the same
background of nothing.
We don't remember
having done it before,
and yet it has been done before,
again and again and again.
Not only before in
time, but all around us
everywhere else in
space is everybody,
is the universe eyeing.
Now, look, let me try and
make this clear in this way.
When I say it's the universe
I-ing, who is I-ing?
What do you mean by I?
Well, there are two
things you can mean by it.
On the one hand, you could
mean what's called your ego,
your personality.
But that's not your real
I-ing, because your personality
is your idea of yourself.
It's your image of yourself.
And that's made up of
how you feel yourself,
how you think about
yourself, thrown in
with what all your friends
and relations have told you
about yourself.
So your image of yourself,
however, obviously
isn't you any more than
your photograph is you
or any more than the
image of anything is it.
All our images of ourselves are
nothing more than caricatures.
They contain no
information, for most of us,
on how we grow our brains,
how we work our nerves,
how we circulate our blood,
how we secrete with our glands,
and how we shape our bones.
That isn't contained in
the sensation or the image
we call the ego.
So obviously, then, the
ego image is not myself.
So myself contains
all these factors
that we could say
the body is doing.
The circulation of the
blood, the breathing,
the electrical activity of
the nerves, all this is me,
but I don't know
anything about it.
I don't know how
it came together.
it's constructed.
And yet I do all that.
If it is true also
to say I breathe.
I walk.
I think.
I am conscious.
I don't know how I managed to
be, but I do it in the same way
as I grow my hair.
So I must, therefore, locate
the center of me, my I-ing,
at a deeper level
than my ego, which
is my image or idea of myself.
But how deep do we go?
We can say the body is the
I, but the body comes out
of the rest of the universe,
comes out of all its energy.
So it's the universe
that's I-ing.
The universe I-s in the
same way that a tree apples
or that a star shines.
And the center of the
appling is the tree.
The center of the
shining is the star.
And so the basic center or self
of the I-ing which is called,
in this case, Alan
Watts, which is
only a name for this
particular physical organism
flowering from, shining out of
this particular environment,
makes the center of all this
I-ing the eternal universe.
Oh, eternal.
The thing has existed
for 10,000 million years
and will probably go on for
at least that much more,
so we won't worry about
how long it goes on.
But repeatedly,
it I-s, so that it
seems to me
absolutely reasonable
to assume that when I die
and this physical body
evaporates and the whole
memory system with it,
then it will be all over once
again the awareness that I
had before, not exactly the same
way, but of a baby being born.
There will, of course, be
myriads of babies born,
not only baby human beings but
baby frogs, baby rabbits, baby
fruit flies, baby
viruses, baby bacteria.
And which one of them
am I going to be?
Only one of them, and
yet every one of them--
because this
experience comes always
in the singular, one at a time--
but certainly one of them.
Actually, it doesn't
make much difference.
Because if I were born
again as a fruit fly,
I would think that
being a fruit fly
was the normal, ordinary
course of events.
And naturally, I would think
that I was an important person,
a highly cultured being,
because fruit flies obviously
have a high culture.
We don't even know
how to look for it,
but probably they have all
sorts of symphonies and music
and artistic performances
in the way light
is reflected on their
wings in different ways,
the way they dance in the air.
And they say, oh, look at her.
She has real style.
Look how the sunlight
comes off her wings.
And they, in their
world, think they're
as important and as civilized
as we do in our world,
so that if I were to
wake up as a fruit fly,
I wouldn't feel any
different, as it
were, than I do when I
wake up as a human being.
I would be used to it.
Well, you say, though,
it wouldn't be me.
Because if it would
be me again, I
would have to remember
how I was before.
All right.
But you don't now remember
how you were before,
and yet you're content enough
to be the me that you are.
In fact, it's a thoroughly
good arrangement in this world
that we don't remember
what it was before.
Why?
Because variety is the spice
of life, and if we remembered,
remembered, remembered having
done this again and again
and again and again,
we should get bored.
And just as a memory is a
beautiful thing to have,
to remember, without memory
we can't be intelligent.
But just as I have explained
that in order to see the figure
you have to have the background,
in order that a memory be
valuable, you've also
got to have a forgetory.
That's why we sleep every
night to refresh ourselves.
We go into the unconscious
so that coming back
to the conscious is
again a great experience.
Well, when that's gone on long
enough, when day after day we
remember the days that have
gone before, even though there's
the interval of sleep,
there comes a point when,
really, if we consider
what is to our true liking,
we will want to forget
everything that went before so
that we can have the
extraordinary experience
of seeing the world once again
through the eyes of a baby,
whatever kind of baby, so
that it's completely new.
We have all the startling
wonder that a child
has, all the vividness
of perception,
which we can't have if we
remember everything forever.
So do you see what happens?
The universe is a system
which not only forgets itself
and then again remembers
anew so that there's always
this constant change
and constant variety
in the span of time, but it also
does it in the span of space
by looking at itself through
every different living organism
to give, as it were,
an all round view.
That's a way of getting
rid of prejudice,
getting rid of a one-sided view.
So death, in that sense,
is a tremendous release
from monotony.
It puts an interval
of total forgetting
in a rhythmic process of
on and off, on and off so
that you can begin all over
again and never be bored.
But the point is
that if you fantasize
the idea of being nothing
for always and always
and always, what you're really
saying is after I'm dead,
the universe stops.
And what I'm saying
is, no, it goes on,
just as it did
when you were born.
You see, you may say that
you think it incredible
that you have more
than one life.
But I say, first of
all, isn't it incredible
that you have this one?
Isn't it incredible that
out of the nothing that
is your past, here you are?
Well, it's astonishing.
So if that's astonishing, it can
always happen again and again
and again.
Now what this is
saying, then, is
that just as you don't know
how you manage to be conscious,
how you manage to grow and
shape this body of yours,
that doesn't mean to say
that you're not doing it.
Equally, you don't know how
the universe shines the stars,
constellates the constellation,
and galactifies the galaxies.
You don't know.
But that doesn't mean to
say that you aren't doing it
in just the same way
as you're breathing
without knowing how you breathe.
If I say really and truly
I am this whole universe,
or put it in another way,
this particular organism
is an I-ing being done
by the whole universe,
and somebody could
say to me, well,
who the hell do
you think you are?
Are you God?
Do you warm up the galaxies?
Canst thou bind the sweet
influences of the Pleiades
or loosen the bonds of Orion?
And I reply to that, who the
hell do you think you are?
Can you tell me how
you grow your brain,
how you shape your eyeballs,
and how you manage to see?
Well, if you can't tell
me that, I can't tell you
how I warm up the
galaxy, only I've
located the center of myself
at a deeper and a more
universal level than we are in
our culture accustomed to do.
So then, if that
universal energy
is the real me,
the real self which
I-s as all these different
organisms spread out
in different spaces or
places and happening
again and again and
again at different times,
we've got a marvellous
system going
in which you can be
eternally surprised.
The universe is
really a system which
keeps on surprising itself.
The ambition that many
of us have, especially
in an age of
technological competence,
to have everything
under our control
is a false ambition,
because you've only
got to think for one moment
what would it be like if you did
really know and
control everything.
Supposing we had a super
colossal technology
which could go to
our wildest dreams
of technological competence
so that everything that
is going to happen would
be foreknown, predicted,
and everything would
be under our control.
Why, you know, it would be like
making love to a plastic woman.
There would be no surprise in
it, no sudden answering touch,
as when we touch
another human being
it's not like touching
something made of plastic.
There comes out a response,
something unexpected.
And that's what we
really want when
we want to relate to the other.
You see, you can't
experience the feeling
you call self unless
it's in contrast
with the feeling of other.
It's like known and
unknown, light and dark,
positive and negative.
Other is necessary in
order for you to feel self.
So then, isn't that the
arrangement you want?
And so, in the same
way, couldn't you
say the arrangement you
want is not to remember.
Memory is always, remember,
a form of control.
I've got it in mind.
I remember it.
I know your number.
You're under control.
Now if you go on remembering
and remembering and remembering,
it's like writing
on a piece of paper
and going on writing and writing
and writing until there's
no white space
left on the paper.
Your memory is
filled up, and so you
need to wipe it all clean so
that you have a white paper
all over again and can begin
to write on it once more.
So that's what
death does for us.
It wipes the slate clean.
And also, looking at it from
the point of view of population
and the human organism
on the planet,
it keeps cleaning us out.
And the idea of a
technology which
would enable each one
of us to be immortal
would be something that
would progressively
crowd the planet with
people with hopelessly
crowded memories.
They would, as it were, be
like people living in a house
where they'd accumulated
so much property,
so many books, so many vases, so
many sets of knives and forks,
so many tables and chairs,
so many newspapers that there
wouldn't be any
room to move around.
To live we need space, and
space is a kind of nothingness,
and death is a kind
of nothingness.
It's all the same principle.
And by putting blocks, as it
were, or spaces of nothingness,
spaces of space in between
spaces of something,
we get life properly spaced
out, to use the German word
lebensraum, room for living.
That's what's space gives us,
and that's what death gives us.
Now, look, notice that
in everything I've
said about death, I
haven't brought in anything
that I could call spookery.
I haven't brought in any
information about anything
that you don't already know.
I haven't invoked any
mysterious knowledge
about souls, memory of former
lives, anything like that.
I've just talked
about it in terms
that we already know
so that if you say,
well, all this idea that people
have of life beyond the grave
is just wishful thinking,
I say, OK, I'll grant that.
Let's assume that that
is wishful thinking
and that when we're dead
there just won't be anything.
See?
Let's face that fact.
That'll be the end.
Now notice, first of
all, that's the worst
thing you've got to fear.
Does it frighten you?
Who's going to be
afraid supposing
it ends, no more problems?
But then you will see that this
nothingness, if you followed
my argument, is something,
as it were, you bounce off
from again, just as you
bounced in the first place
when you were born.
You bounced out of nothingness.
Nothingness is a kind of
bounce, because it implies--
the nothing implies something.
So you bounce back all
new, all different, nothing
to compare it with before,
a refreshing experience.
And if, therefore,
you get this sense,
just like you've got the sense
of nothing behind your eyes,
get the sense of
nothingness, very powerful,
frisky nothingness
underlying your whole being
and there's nothing in that
nothing to be afraid of,
then with that sense
you can come on
like a person for
whom the rest of life
is gravy because
you're already dead.
You know you're going to die.
We say there's
one thing certain,
which is death and taxes.
And the death of
each one of us now
is as certain as
it would be if we
were going to die
five minutes from now.
So where's your anxiety?
Where's your hang-up?
Regard yourself
as dead already so
that you have nothing to lose.
A Turkish proverb says,
"he who sleeps on the floor
will not fall out of bed."
So, in the same
way, the person who
regards himself as already dead.
Therefore, you are
virtually nothing.
100 years from now, you'll
be a handful of dust.
That'll be for real.
All right.
Act on that reality.
And out of that nothing, you
will suddenly surprise yourself
that the more you
know you're nothing,
the more you'll
amount to something.